---
layout: post
title: a brave new (post agile) world
date: 2019-12-14 09:00:00 -04:00
categories: post
permalink: /:categories/:year/:month/:day/:title/
image: /assets/engine.jpg
---

In a world full of Agility, the time has come to be rigid, let me explain the situtation, I'm tired, I'm closing on 30, I have been working with software one way or another for almost 10 years, started with competitive programming in college, to enterprise grade java, to dev-ops deployment, to react-native mobile applications, you name it and I probably have had at least tangencial experience with it.

I've have the honor and the regret of working with a variaty of teams, my first team where we were all competetive programmers, we immediately got along, everyone in the team had a technical background, until this day we still get together whenever possible, it is a friendship that I'm sure will last many years more.

My next teams, as freelancer, where I started working closely with a collegue which I still consider one of the best (if not the best) developer I have know, completely contrarian to common traditions and social rules, then moving to some remote teams, with collegues ranging from Europe to Asia (with special mention to Russia), where you can find anything from incredibly good, to astoningly bad, with was also around this time that I started taking care of teams and working as a tech/team lead.

Moving to Germany, working face to face with people, leading bigger teams and stepping outside of pure technical tasks, sometimes on start-up like projects, sometimes on client projects, where it is also a wide constellation of quality of people and outcome.

Moving to a proper start-up, where things are going well, but even though nobody is screaming it feels a lot more chaotic than other projects, people are young, there is a lot of energy yet, frustration is palpable.

I've been taking a deep look inside, because as of late, I don't feel happy with programming, some of it is quite superficial, spending a lot of time polishing the UI, cleaning old code, to those I know the answer to, they are trivial, but there is a bigger problem here, somewhere along the way I lost the most important part to do what I do, I feel I spend my time arguing with teams about communication, about specifications, about working together, about building the right thing, constantly trying to keep a boat on course to some foggy destination... The world has been eaten by software, you either understand computers or you are nothing, and you either work with computers or you future is certanly doomed, I know this is a over-simplification but I feels that way.

I did not choose to study computer science because it was a good career choice or because I could make a lot of money with it, I choose to study computer science because I inherently had fun with computers, they are such a wonderful piece of machinery, I did not choose computer science to automate the future with AI, digitize the economy and save puppies with functional programming, but a lot of the people have met did (and do) have these lofty goals, they want to help people... they want to know that their work matters, so we turn into computers for the solution to our existencial problems, we bring everyone on the boat regardless of their background. Oh you are a doctor? but you are good with people, why don't you come to lead our developer teams? oh you worked in X industry, I bet you know how to solve the problems the industry has come design a software product with us! You attended a bootcamp, take a technical role!

Computers are hard! they are unveliably complex! [Try to fix one, what are you going to do? take a wrench, smack it](https://youtu.be/-XvI6Y5Yq8o?t=383), here you are! reading this on a piece of machine worth a few hundreds bucks, every single stroke on the keyboard is packaged with decades of knowledge, a global production machine, yet whenever something goes wrong the best you can do is turn it off and on. This thing was built on the shoulders of giants! Ada Lovelace, David Wheeler, Dennis Ritchie, Edsger Dijkstra, so many many great minds... yet here we are, all trying to build the next facebook, we are all steve jobs, building the next big thing, and there is just such a deep missunderstanding... we try to patch the hole, elevate everyone, it's ok! We need to understand the client problem, we produce tickets! and we are doing scrum, we can track the progress! look at our ticket board! and we have designs! oh, and by the way it needs to be done for yesterday...

What good is it man, look at one gooddamn ticket produced by people who don't understand computers "Windows needs to open, list is shown" it's the equivalent of crayon drawing with the expected outcome of golden gate bridge, we schedule 4 hour long meetings to talk about our 4 hour long meetings, you are asked for estimation that if you try to justify is like explaining [what is a glass of milk](https://sciencelens.co.nz/2012/09/25/math-storytelling-day/), recursive complexity.

I've tried more than once to bring people up to speed... here is how you write a ticket, this is the bare minimum information we need to make this work, it works for a week out goes through the window, you don't care about the computer, you only want the solutions, then comes the sprint retrospective, you have nothing to say, it's ok, life could be better but you are just working, yet you get hammered "you need to give feedback! there must be something we can improve! something we did good!", no, there is not that much to say... we are both terribly mediocre, you are not terribly technically iluminated so you stumble around and have hired me to help you, I'm not incredibly creative so I just go along with the situation, can we let it be? guess not...

This entire charade, doesn't work, so let's cut the crap, let us invert the roles, I'm a monkey who knows how to use a wrench, you are monkey who is good to talking to other monkeys and has a problem, sometimes the solution will be sprints and tickets and given a defined answer I might be able to provide you with an estimation, sometimes what we will need to do is sit down and talk the monkey talk, no amount of bullet points and minute meetings will provide an immediate answer for the both of us, if you are creative and good at coming up with solutions, then your input will be of great help, if you are not the best use of your time will be simply providing information and defining the problem as well a possible.

The values of The Manifesto for Agile Software Development, they are still as valuable as ever and I still completely agree with them, I'm done however pretending that everybody can be good at pure software, I will not outline a process, then you end up with a new version of XP or Scrum or whatever, each problem we face is so inherintly complex that trying to fit all teams and all individuals is doom to fail and only create frustration, what I do ask is, recognize your own limitations, independent of profession, if you are a product owner who cannot come up with a good definition or a feature or a solution, remove yourself from that part of the equation and maximize your value to the team, if you know the problem well, write very clear problem definitions put clear parameters of the conditions it needs to work, explain the problems to the team, evaluate the proposed solutions but let the team come up with solutions, if you are a developer but you see that the task you are working on makes little sense, speak up, if you are forced to provide an estimation, do not fold back and accept a fate of late working hours and stress, if you cannot estimate it such is life.

As a software developer you wouldn't ask me to build a bridge, now I'm asking you the same.
