---
layout: post
title: Axioms
excerpt: Statements I consider truth(y)
date: 2020-04-29 09:00:00 -04:00
categories: post
permalink: /:categories/:year/:month/:day/:title/
image: /assets/taco.png
twitter:
  username: "ospfranco"
  card: "Statements I consider truth(y)"
  image: "/assets/taco.png"
---
Some people have been posting things they believe, I found their posts really interesting, [some are high level](https://blog.wesleyac.com/posts/engineering-beliefs), [some closer to the metal](https://blog.wesleyac.com/posts/engineering-beliefs).

Here are some of my beliefs, they are formulated in an axiomatic matter, but they should be read more in the way the manifesto for agile software development is read, that is I hold more value in them than the alternatives but it doesn't mean their counter parts do not matter.

- Computers are just a tool, they do not replace your brain.
- ↑ Pen and paper always compile, if you are able to write down an algorithm/model and try it without a computer, you are far more likely to succeed.
- With time everything regresses to average, applies to productivity, quality, etc., you are (should be) fighting mediocrity everyday of your life.
- Agile is no longer useful or productive and most don't get it anyways.
- Internal motivations > external motivations, money is external.
- Most people are truly good, with enough time they show their best version of themselves, this does not equal to productive team members though.
- Nobody cares about technology, it only matters in regard to how much it achieves, once you accept this your productivity (and happiness) increases.
- You should be playing the meta game of life, work is only but a part of this.
- Simplicity, in life and in software, produces the best results, it is also very complex.
- Producing code is like painting, quality and beauty are tightly interwoven, hard to quantify but you know it when you see it.
- There are no absolute truths (including these), constantly challenging what you know leads to enlightenment.

I won't go into more low level stuff, there is obviously more interesting stuff about engineering, design, etc. but maybe some other day, send me an [email](mailto:ospfranco@protonmail.com) if you find these interesting!